<notextile>
<link href="http://github.com/wmeyer/roads/raw/master/roads/doc/prettify.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
<script type="text/javascript" src="http://github.com/wmeyer/roads/raw/master/roads/doc/prettify.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="http://github.com/wmeyer/roads/raw/master/roads/doc/lang-oz.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" >
$(document).ready(function() {
   prettyPrint();
});
</script></notextile>

h1. The Roads Web Application Framework

Welcome to the official Roads tutorial. Roads is a web application framework for "Mozart/Oz":http://www.mozart-oz.org.

h2. Contents

* "Getting Started":#gettingstarted
* "The Arc Challenge":#arcchallenge
* [[The Session Object]]
* [[Security]]
* [[Application Development]]
* [[Other Features]]
* [[Future Development]]

<a name="gettingstarted"></a>

h2. Getting Started

We expect the reader to be familiar with basic HTML and the fundamentals of the Oz programming language.
Roads was developed using "Mozart 1.4.0":http://www.mozart-oz.org/download/view.cgi?action=default&version=1.4.0. It might also work with older versions.

h3. Installing the web server: Sawhorse

Download the "Sawhorse":http://github.com/wmeyer/roads/downloads/sawhorse-0.2.0.zip web server and unpack it. Alternatively, clone the whole repository: <code>git clone git://github.com/wmeyer/roads.git</code>.<br>
Build the web server with <code>build.sh</code> in the <code>sawhorse</code> directory. <b>You will need GCC installed. On Windows, you need Cygwin and GCC installed.</b><br>
Sawhorse is basically a port of the "Haskell Web Server":http://darcs.haskell.org/hws/ to Oz, extended with a plugin system. Sawhorse is currently the only web server supported by Roads.

h3. Installing and Testing Roads

Next, download "Roads":http://github.com/wmeyer/roads/downloads/roads-0.2.0.zip, unpack it and run <code>build.sh</code> in the <code>roads</code> directory.

Now, lets try a "Hello, world"-application by starting the Emacs-based Mozart OPI and copy-pasting the following code:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-oz"><code>declare
   [Roads] = {Module.link ['x-ozlib://wmeyer/roads/Roads.ozf']}  %% link to Roads

   fun {HelloWorld Session}  %% 'Session': unused in this example
      html(head(title("Hello"))
           body(p("Hello, world!"))
          )
   end
in
   {Roads.registerFunction hello HelloWorld}
   {Roads.run}
</code></pre>

Execute the code in Emacs (menu Oz->Feed Buffer) and navigate to "http://localhost:8080/hello":http://localhost:8080/hello in your web browser.
<b>You can stop the application (and the web server) by feeding the line <code>{Roads.shutDown}</code> or by halting Oz with <code>C-. h</code></b>.

In case of problems, take a look at the <code>*Oz Emulator*</code> buffer, which by default receives Sawhorse and Roads log messages.

This simple example just returns a "record":http://www.mozart-oz.org/home/doc/tutorial/node3.html#label19 value which represents a minimalistic, static HTML page. Let's continue with a more interesting example.

<a name="arcchallenge"></a>

h2. The Arc Challenge

In Februar 2008, Paul Graham proposed "The Arc Challenge":http://www.paulgraham.com/arcchallenge.html:

bq. Write a program that causes the url <code>said</code> (e.g. <code>http://localhost:port/said</code>) to produce a page with an input field and a submit button. When the submit button is pressed, that should produce a second page with a single link saying "click here." When that is clicked it should lead to a third page that says "you said: ..." where ... is whatever the user typed in the original input field. The third page must only show what the user actually typed. I.e. the value entered in the input field must not be passed in the url, or it would be possible to change the behavior of the final page by editing the url.

A possible solution to this challenge in Roads looks like this:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-oz"><code>declare
   [Roads] = {Module.link ['x-ozlib://wmeyer/roads/Roads.ozf']}

   fun {Said Session}
      Foo  %% declares a local variable "Foo"
   in
      html(
        body(
          form(input(type:text bind:Foo)
               input(type:submit)
               method:post
               action:fun {$ _}  %% anonymous function with one unused argument
                         p(a("click here"
                             href:fun {$ _}
                                     p("you said: " # Foo)  %% '#': string concatenation
                                  end
                            ))
                      end
            )))
   end
in
   {Roads.registerFunction said Said}
   {Roads.run}
</code></pre>
      
Most of the code in the <code>Said</code> function is just standard HTML, encoded as an Oz record. There are however two Roads-specific extensions in this example:
# Input tags can have an additional <code>bind</code> attribute. It takes either a variable which will receive the submitted value (like in this example) or a unary procedure which will be called with the input value.
# <code>href</code> and <code>action</code> attributes can take function values instead of URLs. These are automatically converted to unique URLs. When these URLs are requested, the framework will make sure that the right function is called in the right context.

The generated HTML for the outer function looks like this:
<pre class="prettyprint"><code>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/html4/strict.dtd">
<html>
 <body>
  <form action="/said/29T8MW" method="post" >
   <input name="roadsFormBinding0" type="text" >
   <input type="submit" >
   <input name="roadsSecret" type="hidden" value="~589607788" >
  </form>
 </body>
</html>
</code></pre>

By using anonymous functions and exploiting lexical scoping, we are able to access the <code>Foo</code> variable and embed the user-entered text into the output of the innermost function. (A more conventional method to access parameters is also available, see [[The Session Object|next chapter]]).

<div style="margin-left:30px;padding:10px;background-color:#f8f8f8">
What happens if we submit multiple times, e.g. by using the Back button? <code>Foo</code> will be bound to a different value. This would normally cause an exception, because Oz variables are immutable logic variables (similar to single assignment variables). To avoid this situation, Roads uses "computation spaces":http://www.mozart-oz.org/home/doc/system/node45.html. Every nested function is executed within a subordinate computation space, and variable bindings are only visible in that space. We will discuss this in more detail in chapter [[Application Development]].<br>
The bottom line is that this function will behave as expected. Every invocation of the innermost nested function will have its own, independent value for <code>Foo</code>. Consequent or concurrent submission will never accidentally interact with each other.<br>
</div>

The <code>bind</code> attribute is not merely a matter of convenience. It is also essential to make fragments of HTML forms composable, as discussed in chapter [[Other Features]].
<br>


h3. Grouping Functions in Functors

There is one real problem with this example, though. The inner functions do not return valid HTML documents but only fragments. We could fix this by extending these functions with <code>html(head(title(...)) body(...))</code>. However, there is a simpler way to share code between multiple functions.

To use this method, we encapsulate the <code>Said</code> function in a functor (an Oz module). A functor can export multiple functions which are mapped to URLs according to the name which is used to export them. Additionally, a Roads functor can have <code>Before</code> and <code>After</code> functions which are called before and after every regular function. In this example we use the <code>After</code> function to embed the HTML fragments of the <code>Said</code> function and the two nested functions into an HTML document:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-oz"><code>declare
[Roads] = {Module.link ['x-ozlib://wmeyer/roads/Roads.ozf']}

functor Pages
export
   said:Said  %% export as 'said'
   After
define
   fun {Said Session}
      Foo
   in
      form(input(type:text bind:Foo)
           input(type:submit)
           method:post
           action:fun {$ _}
                     p(a("click here" 
                         href:fun {$ _}
                                 p("you said: " # Foo)
                              end
                      ))
                  end
          )
   end
   
   fun {After Session Doc}
      html(head(title("Said"))
           body(Doc)
	  )
   end
end

in

{Roads.registerFunctor '' Pages}  %% map functor to the empty path
{Roads.run}
</code></pre>

Note that we use <code>registerFunctor</code> instead of <code>registerFunction</code>.
We are registering the functor using the empty "atom":http://www.mozart-oz.org/home/doc/tutorial/node3.html#label18 <code>''</code>. The resulting URL is still "http://localhost:8080/said":http://localhost:8080/said because <code>Said</code> is exported using the atom <code>said</code>.

Instead of the literal functor value, we could also have specified the path to a compiled functor.

You might have noticed that all HTML-generating functions take one argument: the session object. We did not use it so far, but in the next section you will see why it is useful.

h2. &nbsp;

Next: [[The Session Object]]

"Wolfgang.Meyer@gmx.net":mailto:Wolfgang.Meyer@gmx.net
